add draft of packaging existing software tutorial (#650)
NixOS/nix.dev: source/tutorials/learning-journey/packaging-existing-software.md

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "description lang=en": "Packaging Existing Software With Nix"
    "keywords": "Nix, packaging"
---

(packaging-existing-software)=

# Packaging Existing Software With Nix

> One of Nix's primary use-cases is in addressing common difficulties encountered while packaging software, like *managing dependencies*.

Author: Originally I used the `master` branch of `icat` which required putting `pkg-config` into `nativeBuildOutputs`, and the idea was to eventually add a third section to this tutorial where we package something else which requires setting `NIX_LDFLAGS` and such to get stuff linked appropriately. Without that, no reason to keep this suggestive emphasis.

In the long term, Nix helps tremendously in alleviating that stress, but when *first* (re)packaging existing software with Nix, it's common to encounter missing dependencies preventing builds from succeeding.

In this tutorial, you'll create your first Nix derivations to package C/C++ software, taking advantage of the [`nixpkgs` `stdenv`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-stdenv) which automates much of the work of building self-contained C/C++ packages.

The tutorial begins by considering `hello`, an implementation of "hello world" which only requires dependencies already in `stdenv`.

Next, you will build more complex packages with their own dependencies, leading you to use additional derivation features.

You'll encounter and address Nix error messages, build failures, and a host of other issues, developing your iterative debugging techniques along the way.

:::{note}

> An important point of clarification: the term "package" is used conventionally by analogy to other systems, although the term does not refer to a proper concept in Nix.

Reviewer: So Nix doesn't have a package concept, but Nixpkgs definitely does, it's just not formally defined. I think this would be a concise and accurate description:

```suggestion
A _package_ is an informally defined Nixpkgs concept referring to a Nix derivation representing an installation of some project.
Packages have mostly standardised attributes and output layouts, allowing them to be discovered in searches and installed into environments alongside other packages.
```

For the purposes of this tutorial, "package" means something like "result of a derivation"; this is the artifact you or others will use, as a consequence of having "packaged existing software with Nix".
:::

## A Simple Project
To start, consider this skeleton derivation:

```nix

> { stdenv }:

Author: Good reminder, though this raises an important question: what is the intended first-reading order of the Learning Journey? Would be helpful to explain that in [`index.md`](https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/blob/7b866ebc5e96e5a1d484d04ba518fcdf6a9d48ef/source/tutorials/learning-journey/index.md)

> stdenv.mkDerivation {	};

Author: Here too re: https://github.com/NixOS/nix.dev/pull/650#discussion_r1288666805

  };
}
```

Save this file to `hello.nix` and try to build it with `nix-build`, observing your first build failure:

```console
$ nix-build hello.nix
error: cannot evaluate a function that has an argument without a value ('lib')
       Nix attempted to evaluate a function as a top level expression; in
       this case it must have its arguments supplied either by default
       values, or passed explicitly with '--arg' or '--argstr'. See
       https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/constructs.html#functions.

       at /home/nix-user/hello.nix:2:3:

            1| # hello.nix
            2| { lib
             |   ^
            3| , stdenv
```

Problem: the expression in `hello.nix` is a *function*, which only produces its intended output if it is passed the correct *arguments*.

### A New Command
`lib` is available from `nixpkgs`, which must be imported with another Nix expression in order to pass it as an argument to this derivation.

The recommended way to do this is to create a `default.nix` in the same directory as `hello.nix`, with the following contents:

```nix
# default.nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { };
in
{
  hello = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { };
}
```

> This allows you to use `nix-build -A hello` to realize the derivation in `hello.nix`, similar to the current convention used in `nixpkgs`.

Author: I don't disagree, but it's not *too* much more to type and we eventually want people to help maintain the broader project.

> This allows you to use `nix-build -A hello` to realize the derivation in `hello.nix`, similar to the current convention used in `nixpkgs`.

Reviewer: I agree with @proofconstruction, it was also me who originally said that we don't want to use `nix-build -E 'with import <nixpkgs> {}; callPackage ./hello.nix { }`, because that's already an antipattern in Nixpkgs.

And the alternative of using just a single buildable file like this:

```nix
with import <nixpkgs> {};
stdenv.mkDerivation {
  ...
}
```

has the problem that it doesn't support `.override` (`callPackage` adds that), and it would be different from the Nixpkgs convention. It would also mean that if you have multiple packages, Nixpkgs would get imported multiple times and in potentially different ways and different versions.

> This allows you to use `nix-build -A hello` to realize the derivation in `hello.nix`, similar to the current convention used in `nixpkgs`.

Reviewer 2: I'm not going to block on this suggestion, I just think it's important to remember that most users don't care about doing things the `nixpkgs` way because it doesn't provide any value _to them_.

> This allows you to use `nix-build -A hello` to realize the derivation in `hello.nix`, similar to the current convention used in `nixpkgs`.

Reviewer: I think there's a lot of value in doing it like this, independently of Nixpkgs:
- It cleanly separates the definition of the package (`hello.nix`) from the importing of its dependencies (Getting some Nixpkgs path in `default.nix`). This is just good practice in general from a separation-of-concerns point-of-view, but it also allows reusing the files in various ways, e.g. you could call the same `hello.nix` with different versions of dependencies, or you could copy the `hello.nix` to `hello-alt.nix` and change it to get a different build with the same dependencies.
- `callPackage` adds the `.override` functionality, which allows easy overriding of dependencies and custom package configuration, fairly clearly separated from the implementation.

But still, we cannot deny Nixpkgs existing, it adds more benefits on top:
- All packages in Nixpkgs are packaged using this very same convention, allowing users to either copy package expressions directly from Nixpkgs, modify and build them, or the other way around, easily upstream packages to Nixpkgs.
- All packages in Nixpkgs have a `.override`, and people are used to being able to change dependencies and configuration using it.

:::{note}
`callPackage` automatically passes attributes from `nixpkgs` to the given function, if they match attributes required by that function's argument attrset.

In this case, `callPackage` will supply `lib`, and `stdenv` to the function defined in `hello.nix`.
:::

Now run the `nix-build` command with the new argument:

```console
$ nix-build -A hello
error: derivation name missing
```

> This new failure occurs with the *derivation*, further down in the file than the initial error on line 2 about the `lib` argument not having a value; the previous error was successfully resolved by changing the expression passed to `nix-build`.

Reviewer 2: You can replace this entire sentence with something along the lines of "this is a _new_ error, let's explore where it comes from".

### Naming a Derivation

> Every derivation needs a `name` attribute, which must either be set directly or constructed by `mkDerivation` from `pname` and `version` attributes, if they exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every derivation must have a name which is set via `name` or `pname` and `version` attributes.
```

Update the file again to add a `name`:

```nix
# hello.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchzip
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "hello";

  src = fetchzip {
    url = "https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz";
    sha256 = lib.fakeSha256;
  };
}
```
and then re-run the command:

```console
$ nix-build -A hello
error:
...
       … while evaluating attribute 'src' of derivation 'hello'

         at /home/nix-user/hello.nix:9:3:

            8|
            9|   src = fetchzip {
             |   ^
           10|     url = "https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz";

       error: hash mismatch in file downloaded from 'https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz':
         specified: sha256:0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
         got:       sha256:0xw6cr5jgi1ir13q6apvrivwmmpr5j8vbymp0x6ll0kcv6366hnn
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You're finally back to figuring out the correct hash.
```

### Finding The File Hash
As expected, the incorrect file hash caused an error, and Nix helpfully provided the correct one, which you can now substitute into `hello.nix` to replace `lib.fakeSha256`:

```nix
# hello.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchzip
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "hello";

  src = fetchzip {
    url = "https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz";
    sha256 = "0xw6cr5jgi1ir13q6apvrivwmmpr5j8vbymp0x6ll0kcv6366hnn";
  };
}
```

Now run the previous command again:

```console
$ nix-build -A hello
this derivation will be built:
  /nix/store/rbq37s3r76rr77c7d8x8px7z04kw2mk7-hello.drv
building '/nix/store/rbq37s3r76rr77c7d8x8px7z04kw2mk7-hello.drv'...
...
configuring
...
configure: creating ./config.status
config.status: creating Makefile
...
building
... <many more lines omitted>
```
Great news: the derivation built successfully!

> The console output shows that `configure` was called, which produced a `Makefile` that was then used to build the project; it wasn't necessary to write any build instructions in this case, because the `stdenv` build system is based on `autoconf`, which automatically detected the structure of the project directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The console output shows that `configure` was called, which produced a `Makefile` that was then used to build the project.
It wasn't necessary to write any build instructions in this case because the `stdenv` build system is based on `autoconf`, which automatically detected the structure of the project directory.
```

### Build Result
Check your working directory for the result:

```console
$ ls
default.nix hello.nix  result
```

> This result is a symbolic link to a Nix store location containing the built binary; you can call `./result/bin/hello` to execute this program:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This `result` is a symbolic link to a Nix store location containing the built binary; you can call `./result/bin/hello` to execute this program:
```

```console
$ ./result/bin/hello
Hello, world!
```

Congratulations, you have successfully packaged your first program with Nix!

> Next, you'll package another piece of software with external-to-`stdenv` dependencies that present new challenges, requiring you to make use of more `mkDerivation` features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, you'll package another piece of software with dependencies that present new challenges, requiring you to make use of more `mkDerivation` features.
```

## Something Bigger
Now you will package a somewhat more complicated program, [`icat`](https://github.com/atextor/icat), which allows you to render images in your terminal.

> To start, modify the `default.nix` from the previous section by adding a new attribute for `icat`:

Reviewer 2: Most builds probably won't be packaging two completely unrelated pieces of software in the same build, so it probably makes more sense to start with a new `default.nix` for `icat`.

Reviewer: I don't agree, I think showing the `default.nix` with multiple programs is really nice, it teaches the user how files can be reused for packages, and it brings them a step closer to grokking Nixpkgs.

```nix
# default.nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { };
in
{
  hello = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { };
  icat = pkgs.callPackage ./icat.nix { };
}
```

Now copy `hello.nix` to a new file, `icat.nix`, and update the `name` attribute in that file:

```nix
# icat.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchzip
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";

  src = fetchzip {
    ...
  };
}
```

> Now to download the source code. `icat`'s upstream repository is hosted on [GitHub](https://github.com/atextor/icat), so you should slightly modify the previous [source fetcher](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-pkgs-fetchers), this time using `fetchFromGitHub` instead of `fetchzip`, updating the argument attribute set to the function accordingly:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now to download the source code.
`icat`'s upstream repository is hosted on [GitHub](https://github.com/atextor/icat), so you should modify the previous [source fetcher](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-pkgs-fetchers), this time using `fetchFromGitHub` instead of `fetchzip`, updating the argument attribute set to the function accordingly:
```

```nix
# icat.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchFromGitHub
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";

  src = fetchFromGitHub {
    ...
  };
}
```

### Fetching Source from GitHub
While `fetchzip` required `url` and `sha256` arguments, more are needed for [`fetchFromGitHub`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#fetchfromgithub).

The source is hosted on GitHub at `https://github.com/atextor/icat`, which already gives the first two arguments:

> - `owner`: the name of the account controlling the repository; `owner = "atextor"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `owner`: the name of the account controlling the repository; `owner = "atextor";`
```

> - `repo`: the name of the repository to fetch; `repo = "icat"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `repo`: the name of the repository to fetch; `repo = "icat";`
```

You can navigate to the project's [Releases page](https://github.com/atextor/icat/releases) to find a suitable `rev`, such as the git commit hash or tag (e.g. `v1.0`) corresponding to the release you want to fetch.

In this case, the latest release tag is `v0.5`.

As in the `hello` example, a hash must also be supplied.

This time, instead of using `lib.fakeSha256` and letting `nix-build` report the correct one in an error, you can fetch the correct hash in the first place with the `nix-prefetch-url` command.

You need the SHA256 hash of the *contents* of the tarball (as opposed to the hash of the tarball file itself), so you will need to pass the `--unpack` and `--type sha256` arguments too:

```console
$ nix-prefetch-url --unpack https://github.com/atextor/icat/archive/refs/tags/v0.5.tar.gz --type sha256
path is '/nix/store/p8jl1jlqxcsc7ryiazbpm7c1mqb6848b-v0.5.tar.gz'
0wyy2ksxp95vnh71ybj1bbmqd5ggp13x3mk37pzr99ljs9awy8ka
```

> Now you can supply the correct hash to `fetchFromGitHub`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you can supply the correct hash to `fetchFromGitHub` from the beginning:
```

```console
$ nix-build -A icat
these 2 derivations will be built:
  /nix/store/86q9x927hsyyzfr4lcqirmsbimysi6mb-source.drv
  /nix/store/l5wz9inkvkf0qhl8kpl39vpg2xfm2qpy-icat.drv
...
error: builder for '/nix/store/l5wz9inkvkf0qhl8kpl39vpg2xfm2qpy-icat.drv' failed with exit code 2;
       last 10 log lines:
       >                  from /nix/store/hkj250rjsvxcbr31fr1v81cv88cdfp4l-glibc-2.37-8-dev/include/stdio.h:27,
       >                  from icat.c:31:
       > /nix/store/hkj250rjsvxcbr31fr1v81cv88cdfp4l-glibc-2.37-8-dev/include/features.h:195:3: warning: #warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE" [8;;https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Warning-Options.html#index-Wcpp-Wcpp8;;]
       >   195 | # warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE"
       >       |   ^~~~~~~
       > icat.c:39:10: fatal error: Imlib2.h: No such file or directory
       >    39 | #include <Imlib2.h>
       >       |          ^~~~~~~~~~
       > compilation terminated.
       > make: *** [Makefile:16: icat.o] Error 1
       For full logs, run 'nix log /nix/store/l5wz9inkvkf0qhl8kpl39vpg2xfm2qpy-icat.drv'.
```

> A compiler error! The `icat` source was pulled from GitHub, and Nix tried to build what it found, but compilation failed due to a missing dependency: the `imlib2` header.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A compiler error!
The `icat` source was pulled from GitHub, and Nix tried to build what it found, but compilation failed due to a missing dependency: the `imlib2` header.
```

If you [search for `imlib2` on search.nixos.org](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=23.05&from=0&size=50&sort=relevance&type=packages&query=imlib2), you'll find that `imlib2` is already in `nixpkgs`.

You can add this package to your build environment by adding `imlib2` to the set of inputs to the expression in `icat.nix`, and then adding `imlib2` to the list of `buildInputs` in `stdenv.mkDerivation`:

```nix
# icat.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchFromGitHub

> , imlib2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
, imlib2 # new dependency
```

}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";

  src = fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "atextor";
    repo = "icat";
    rev = "v0.5";
    sha256 = "0wyy2ksxp95vnh71ybj1bbmqd5ggp13x3mk37pzr99ljs9awy8ka";
  };

>   buildInputs = [ imlib2 ];

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  buildInputs = [ imlib2 ]; # Add the dependency to the build
```

}
```

> Another error, but compilation proceeds further this time:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run `nix-build -A icat` again and you'll encounter another error, but compilation proceeds further this time:
```

       last 10 log lines:
       >                  from icat.c:31:
       > /nix/store/hkj250rjsvxcbr31fr1v81cv88cdfp4l-glibc-2.37-8-dev/include/features.h:195:3: warning: #warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE" [8;;https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Warning-Options.html#index-Wcpp-Wcpp8;;]
       >   195 | # warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE"
       >       |   ^~~~~~~
       > In file included from icat.c:39:
       > /nix/store/4fvrh0sjc8sbkbqda7dfsh7q0gxmnh9p-imlib2-1.11.1-dev/include/Imlib2.h:45:10: fatal error: X11/Xlib.h: No such file or directory
       >    45 | #include <X11/Xlib.h>
       >       |          ^~~~~~~~~~~~
       > compilation terminated.
       > make: *** [Makefile:16: icat.o] Error 1
       For full logs, run 'nix log /nix/store/bw2d4rp2k1l5rg49hds199ma2mz36x47-icat.drv'.
```

You can see a few warnings which should be corrected in the upstream code, but the important bit for this tutorial is `fatal error: X11/Xlib.h: No such file or directory`: another dependency is missing.

:::{note}

> Determining from where to source a dependency is currently a somewhat-involved process: it helps to become familiar with searching the `nixpkgs` source for keywords.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't actually help a user solve their problem, they're almost guaranteed not to be familiar with `nixpkgs` source. I would recommend to instead tell them how to search `nixpkgs` or whatever it is they _actually_ need to do.

Author: Agreed, but developing those heuristics is probably another whole tutorial, which we probably could just point to from this note once it exists (if)

Reviewer: Yeah I think this would be better as a separate tutorial, it's really quite involved (grep, `unsafeGetAttrPos`, `nix edit`, the structure of Nixpkgs, backtracking through definitions)

Reviewer 2: Discussed online: mention `nix-locate`, we don't mind that it's a third-party tool

:::

You will need the `Xlib.h` headers from the `X11` C package, the Nixpkgs derivation for which is `libX11`, available in the `xorg` package set.

Add this to your derivation's input attribute set and to `buildInputs`:

```nix
# icat.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchFromGitHub
, imlib2

> , xorg

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
, xorg # new dependency
```

}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";

  src = fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "atextor";
    repo = "icat";
    rev = "v0.5";
    sha256 = "0wyy2ksxp95vnh71ybj1bbmqd5ggp13x3mk37pzr99ljs9awy8ka";
  };

>   buildInputs = [ imlib2 xorg.libX11 ];

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # Note that we only add the libX11 attribute instead of the entire 'xorg' derivation!
  buildInputs = [ imlib2 xorg.libX11 ];
```

Reviewer: `xorg` is not a derivation, but a "package set" (not formally defined, but just an attribute set where the values are packages)

}
```

:::{note}
Only add the top-level `xorg` derivation to the input attrset, rather than the full `xorg.libX11`, as the latter would cause a syntax error.

> Because Nix is lazily-evaluated, including the dependency this way is safe to do and doesn't actually include all of `xorg` into the build context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because Nix is lazily-evaluated, using `xorg.libX11` means that we only include the `libX11` attribute and the derivation doesn't actually include all of `xorg` into the build context.
```

       > make: *** No rule to make target 'install'.  Stop.
       For full logs, run 'nix log /nix/store/x1d79ld8jxqdla5zw2b47d2sl87mf56k-icat.drv'.
```

The missing dependency error is solved, but there is now another problem: `make: *** No rule to make target 'install'.  Stop.`

### installPhase
The `stdenv` is automatically working with the `Makefile` that comes with `icat`: you can see in the console output that `configure` and `make` are executed without issue, so the `icat` binary is compiling successfully.

The failure occurs when the `stdenv` attempts to run `make install`: the `Makefile` included in the project happens to lack an `install` target, and the `README` in the `icat` repository only mentions using `make` to build the tool, leaving the installation step up to users.

To add this step to your derivation, use the [`installPhase` attribute](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#ssec-install-phase), which contains a list of command strings to execute to perform the installation.

Because the `make` step completes successfully, the `icat` executable is available in the build directory, and you only need to copy it from there to the output directory.

> In Nix, this location is stored in the `$out` variable, accessible in the derivation's component scripts; create a `bin` directory within that and copy the `icat` binary there:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Nix, the output directory is stored in the `$out` variable, accessible in the derivation's component scripts.
Create a `bin` directory within the `$out` directory and copy the `icat` binary there:
```

Author: I should learn to use fewer semicolons in this writing.

```nix
# icat.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchFromGitHub
, imlib2
, xorg
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";

  src = fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "atextor";
    repo = "icat";
    rev = "v0.5";
    sha256 = "0wyy2ksxp95vnh71ybj1bbmqd5ggp13x3mk37pzr99ljs9awy8ka";
  };

  buildInputs = [ imlib2 xorg.libX11.dev ];

  installPhase = ''
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    cp icat $out/bin
  '';
}
```

### Phases and Hooks
Nixpkgs `stdenv.mkDerivation` derivations are separated into [phases](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#sec-stdenv-phases), each of which is intended to control some aspect of the build process.

> You saw earlier how the `stdenv.mkDerivation` expected the project's `Makefile` to have an `install` target, and failed when it didn't.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You saw earlier how `stdenv.mkDerivation` expected the project's `Makefile` to have an `install` target, and failed when it didn't.
```

> To fix this, you defined a custom `installPhase`, containing instructions for copying the `icat` binary to the correct output location, in effect installing it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To fix this, you defined a custom `installPhase` containing instructions for copying the `icat` binary to the correct output location, in effect installing it.
```

During derivation realisation, there are a number of shell functions ("hooks", in `nixpkgs`) which may execute in each derivation phase, which do things like set variables, source files, create directories, and so on.

These are specific to each phase, and run both before and after that phase's execution, controlling the build environment and helping to prevent environment-modifying behavior defined within packages from creating sources of nondeterminism within and between Nix derivations.

It's good practice when packaging software with Nix to include calls to these hooks in the derivation phases you define, even when you don't make direct use of them; this facilitates easy [overriding](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-overrides) of specific parts of the derivation later, in addition to the previously-mentioned reproducibility benefits.

You should now adjust your `installPhase` to call the appropriate hooks:

```nix
# icat.nix
...
  installPhase = ''
    runHook preInstall
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    cp icat $out/bin
    runHook postInstall
  '';
...
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### A successful build
```

Finally building the package is an important step and shouldn't be (accidentally) hidden inside of the "Phases and Hooks" section, where it can be overlooked.

As you progress through this tutorial, you will update this several times, adding more details while following the general pattern.

### Hello, World!
GNU Hello is an implementation of the "hello world" program, with source code accessible [from the GNU Project's FTP server](https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/hello/).

To begin, you will download the [latest version](https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz) of `hello` using `fetchzip`, which takes the URI path to the download file and a SHA256 hash of its contents.

:::{note}
`fetchzip` can fetch [more archives](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#fetchurl) than just zip files!
:::

The hash cannot be known until after the tarball has been downloaded and unpacked, but Nix will complain if the hash supplied to `fetchzip` was incorrect, so it is common practice to supply a fake one with `lib.fakeSha256` and change the derivation definition after Nix reports the correct hash:

```nix
# hello.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchzip
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  src = fetchzip {
    url = "https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz";
    sha256 = lib.fakeSha256;
  };
}
```

> Save this file to `hello.nix` and try to build it with `nix-build`, observing your first build failure:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Save this file to `hello.nix` and try to build it with `nix-build`, observing your first build failure.
Note that this isn't the error you might expect!
In order to see the error message about the SHA256 hash the build has to be functioning, and it's not quite there yet.
```

:::

## A Simple Project
To start, consider this skeleton derivation:

```nix
{ stdenv }:

stdenv.mkDerivation {	};
```

This is a function which takes an attribute set containing `stdenv`, and produces a derivation (which currently does nothing). As you progress through this tutorial, you will update this several times, adding more details while following the general pattern.

### Hello, World!
GNU Hello is an implementation of the "hello world" program, with source code accessible [from the GNU Project's FTP server](https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/hello/).

To begin, you will download the [latest version](https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/hello/hello-2.12.1.tar.gz) of `hello` using `fetchTarball`, which takes the URI path to the download file and a SHA256 hash of its contents.

The hash cannot be known until after the tarball has been downloaded and unpacked, but Nix will complain if the hash supplied to `fetchTarball` was incorrect, so it is common practice to supply a fake one with `lib.fakeSha256` and change the derivation definition after Nix reports the correct hash:

```nix
# hello.nix

> { lib
> , stdenv
> }:
> 
> stdenv.mkDerivation {
>   src = builtins.fetchTarball {

Reviewer: > How should it be done otherwise?

```suggestion
{ lib
, stdenv
, fetchzip
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  src = fetchzip {
```

Next, you'll package another piece of software with external-to-`stdenv` dependencies that present new challenges, requiring you to make use of more `mkDerivation` features.

## Something Bigger
Now you will package a somewhat more complicated program, `icat`, which allows you to render images in your terminal.

To start, modify the `default.nix` from the previous section by adding a new attribute for `icat`:

```nix
# default.nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { };
in
{
  hello = pkgs.callPackage ./hello.nix { };
  icat = pkgs.callPackage ./icat.nix { };
}
```

Now copy `hello.nix` to a new file, `icat.nix`, and update the `name` attribute in that file:

```nix
# icat.nix
{ lib
, stdenv
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";

  src = builtins.fetchTarball {
	...
  };
}
```

Now to download the source code. `icat`'s upstream repository is hosted on [GitHub](https://github.com/atextor/icat), so you should slightly modify the previous [source fetcher](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-pkgs-fetchers), this time using `pkgs.fetchFromGitHub` instead of `builtins.fetchTarball`, updating the argument attribute set to the function accordingly:

```nix
# icat.nix

> { pkgs
> , lib
> , stdenv
> }:
> 
> stdenv.mkDerivation {
>   name = "icat";
> 
>   src = pkgs.fetchFromGitHub {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{ lib
, stdenv
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";

  src = fetchFromGitHub {
```

> > Don’t have pkgs in the arguments, bad practice.
>
> Why is this bad practice?

Because all `pkgs.<attr>` can be accessed by adding `<attr>` to the argument list. This then also allows people to override `<attr>` using `.override { <attr> = ...; }`

    ...
  };
}
```

### Fetching Source from GitHub
While `fetchTarball` required `url` and `sha256` arguments, more are needed for [`fetchFromGitHub`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#fetchfromgithub).

The source is hosted on GitHub at `https://github.com/atextor/icat`, which already gives the first two arguments:
- `owner`: the name of the account controlling the repository; `owner = "atextor"`
- `repo`: the name of the repository to fetch; `repo = "icat"`

You can navigate to the project's [Releases page](https://github.com/atextor/icat/releases) to find a suitable `rev`, such as the git commit hash or tag (e.g. `v1.0`) corresponding to the release you want to fetch. In this case, the latest release tag is `v0.5`.

> As in the `hello` example, a hash must also be supplied. This time, instead of using `lib.fakeSha256` and letting `nix-build` report the correct one in an error, you can fetch the correct hash in the first place with the `nix-prefetch-url` command. You need the SHA256 hash of the *contents* of the tarball, so you will need to pass the `--unpack` and `--type sha256` arguments too:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As in the `hello` example, a hash must also be supplied. This time, instead of using `lib.fakeSha256` and letting `nix-build` report the correct one in an error, you can fetch the correct hash in the first place with the `nix-prefetch-url` command. You need the SHA256 hash of the *contents* of the tarball (as opposed to the hash of the tarball file itself), so you will need to pass the `--unpack` and `--type sha256` arguments too:
```

The details here are more intricate (such as the fact that we need this because GitHub occasionally changes the hash of the tarballs, which not all sites do; or how there's no standard directory hash, Nix uses its own NAR format for that; or how there's also `nix-prefetch-github` (and others), but they're not official), but I don't think this needs to be mentioned here.

Reviewer: Also, it would be great if you used one line per sentence, [as described in the nix.dev style guidelines](https://nix.dev/contributing/style-guide#one-line-per-sentence), makes reviewing such parts much nicer :smile:

       >                  from icat.c:31:
       > /nix/store/hkj250rjsvxcbr31fr1v81cv88cdfp4l-glibc-2.37-8-dev/include/features.h:195:3: warning: #warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE" [8;;https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Warning-Options.html#index-Wcpp-Wcpp8;;]
       >   195 | # warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE"
       >       |   ^~~~~~~
       > icat.c:39:10: fatal error: Imlib2.h: No such file or directory
       >    39 | #include <Imlib2.h>
       >       |          ^~~~~~~~~~
       > compilation terminated.
       > make: *** [Makefile:16: icat.o] Error 1
       For full logs, run 'nix log /nix/store/l5wz9inkvkf0qhl8kpl39vpg2xfm2qpy-icat.drv'.
```

A compiler error! The `icat` source was pulled from GitHub, and Nix tried to build what it found, but compilation failed due to a missing dependency: the `imlib2` header. If you [search for `imlib2` on search.nixos.org](https://search.nixos.org/packages?channel=23.05&from=0&size=50&sort=relevance&type=packages&query=imlib2), you'll find that `imlib2` is already in `nixpkgs`.

> You can add this package to your build environment by either
> - adding `imlib2` to the set of inputs to the expression in `icat.nix`, and then adding `imlib2` to the list of `buildInputs` in `stdenv.mkDerivation`, or
> - adding `pkgs.imlib2` to the `buildInputs` directly, since `pkgs` is already in-scope.
> 
> Because `callPackage` is used to provide all necessary inputs in `nixpkgs` as well as in the `nix-build` invocation, the first approach is the one currently favored, and you should use it here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add this package to your build environment by adding `imlib2` to the set of inputs to the expression in `icat.nix`, and then adding `imlib2` to the list of `buildInputs` in `stdenv.mkDerivation`:
```

```nix
# icat.nix
{ pkgs
, lib
, stdenv
, imlib2
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";

  src = pkgs.fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "atextor";

> 	repo = "icat";

Reviewer: Indentation needs some cleanup.

error: builder for '/nix/store/bw2d4rp2k1l5rg49hds199ma2mz36x47-icat.drv' failed with exit code 2;
       last 10 log lines:
       >                  from icat.c:31:
       > /nix/store/hkj250rjsvxcbr31fr1v81cv88cdfp4l-glibc-2.37-8-dev/include/features.h:195:3: warning: #warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE" [8;;https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Warning-Options.html#index-Wcpp-Wcpp8;;]
       >   195 | # warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE"
       >       |   ^~~~~~~
       > In file included from icat.c:39:
       > /nix/store/4fvrh0sjc8sbkbqda7dfsh7q0gxmnh9p-imlib2-1.11.1-dev/include/Imlib2.h:45:10: fatal error: X11/Xlib.h: No such file or directory
       >    45 | #include <X11/Xlib.h>
       >       |          ^~~~~~~~~~~~
       > compilation terminated.
       > make: *** [Makefile:16: icat.o] Error 1
       For full logs, run 'nix log /nix/store/bw2d4rp2k1l5rg49hds199ma2mz36x47-icat.drv'.
```

You can see a few warnings which should be corrected in the upstream code, but the important bit for this tutorial is `fatal error: X11/Xlib.h: No such file or directory`: another dependency is missing.

> In addition to the widespread practice of prefixing a project name with `lib` to indicate the libraries of that project, in Nixpkgs it's also common to separate headers, libraries, binaries, and documentation into different output attributes of a given [derivation](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/language/derivations.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I don't think it should be necessary to talk about multiple outputs here.

:::{note}

> Determining from where to source a dependency is currently a somewhat-involved process: it helps to become familiar with searching the `nixpkgs` source for keywords, in addition to checking discussion platforms like [the official NixOS Discourse](https://discourse.nixos.org).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Determining from where to source a dependency is currently a somewhat-involved process: it helps to become familiar with searching the `nixpkgs` source for keywords.
```

I don't think it's necessary to mention discourse here, it's not directly useful for this.

:::

> You will need the `Xlib.h` headers from the `X11` C package, the Nixpkgs derivation for which is `libX11`, available in the `xorg` package set. The `Xlib` headers in turn live in the `dev` output of `xorg.libX11`. Add this to your derivation's input attribute set and to `buildInputs`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will need the `Xlib.h` headers from the `X11` C package, the Nixpkgs derivation for which is `libX11`, available in the `xorg` package set. Add this to your derivation's input attribute set and to `buildInputs`:
```

```nix
# icat.nix
{ pkgs
, lib
, stdenv
, imlib2
, xorg
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";

  src = pkgs.fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "atextor";
    repo = "icat";
    rev = "v0.5";
    sha256 = "0wyy2ksxp95vnh71ybj1bbmqd5ggp13x3mk37pzr99ljs9awy8ka";
  };

>   buildInputs = [ imlib2 xorg.libX11.dev ];

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  buildInputs = [ imlib2 xorg.libX11 ];
```

}
```

:::{note}
Only add the top-level `xorg` derivation to the input attrset, rather than the full `xorg.libX11.dev`, as the latter would cause a syntax error. Because Nix is lazily-evaluated, including the dependency this way is safe to do and doesn't actually include all of `xorg` into the build context.
:::

> ### `buildInputs` and `nativeBuildInputs`

Reviewer: Title seems wrong :)

                 from /nix/store/hkj250rjsvxcbr31fr1v81cv88cdfp4l-glibc-2.37-8-dev/include/stdio.h:27,
                 from icat.c:31:
/nix/store/hkj250rjsvxcbr31fr1v81cv88cdfp4l-glibc-2.37-8-dev/include/features.h:195:3: warning: #warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE" [8;;https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Warning-Options.html#index-Wcpp-Wcpp8;;]
  195 | # warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE"
      |   ^~~~~~~
icat.c: In function 'main':
icat.c:319:33: warning: ignoring return value of 'write' declared with attribute 'warn_unused_result' [8;;https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Warning-Options.html#index-Wunused-result-Wunused-result8;;]
  319 |                                 write(tempfile, &buf, 1);
      |                                 ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
gcc -o icat icat.o -lImlib2
installing
install flags: SHELL=/nix/store/8fv91097mbh5049i9rglc73dx6kjg3qk-bash-5.2-p15/bin/bash install
make: *** No rule to make target 'install'.  Stop.
error: builder for '/nix/store/x1d79ld8jxqdla5zw2b47d2sl87mf56k-icat.drv' failed with exit code 2;

>        last 10 log lines:
>        >   195 | # warning "_BSD_SOURCE and _SVID_SOURCE are deprecated, use _DEFAULT_SOURCE"
>        >       |   ^~~~~~~
>        > icat.c: In function 'main':
>        > icat.c:319:33: warning: ignoring return value of 'write' declared with attribute 'warn_unused_result' [8;;https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Warning-Options.html#index-Wunused-result-Wunused-result8;;]
>        >   319 |                                 write(tempfile, &buf, 1);
>        >       |                                 ^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
>        > gcc -o icat icat.o -lImlib2
>        > installing
>        > install flags: SHELL=/nix/store/8fv91097mbh5049i9rglc73dx6kjg3qk-bash-5.2-p15/bin/bash install
>        > make: *** No rule to make target 'install'.  Stop.
>        For full logs, run 'nix log /nix/store/x1d79ld8jxqdla5zw2b47d2sl87mf56k-icat.drv'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We can see the full logs, no need to have the repeat of the last 10 lines here. Same for other errors.

To add this step to your derivation, use the [`installPhase` attribute](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#ssec-install-phase), which contains a list of command strings to execute to perform the installation.

Because the `make` step completes successfully, the `icat` executable is available in the build directory, and you only need to copy it from there to the output directory. In Nix, this location is stored in the `$out` variable, accessible in the derivation's component scripts; create a `bin` directory within that and copy the `icat` binary there:

```nix
# icat.nix
{ pkgs
, lib
, stdenv
, imlib2
, xorg
}:

stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "icat";

  src = pkgs.fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "atextor";
    repo = "icat";
    rev = "v0.5";
    sha256 = "0wyy2ksxp95vnh71ybj1bbmqd5ggp13x3mk37pzr99ljs9awy8ka";
  };

  buildInputs = [ imlib2 xorg.libX11.dev ];

  installPhase = ''
    mkdir -p $out/bin
    cp icat $out/bin
  '';
}
```

### Phases and Hooks

> Nix package derivations are separated into [phases](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/unstable/#sec-stdenv-phases), each of which is intended to control some aspect of the build process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nixpkgs `stdenv.mkDerivation` derivations are separated into [phases](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#sec-stdenv-phases), each of which is intended to control some aspect of the build process.
```

This is specific to Nixpkgs, not Nix.

Also we should only link to the stable manual.

> You saw earlier how the `stdenv` expected the project's `Makefile` to have an `install` target, and failed when it didn't. To fix this, you defined a custom `installPhase`, containing instructions for copying the `icat` binary to the correct output location, in effect installing it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You saw earlier how the `stdenv.mkDerivation` expected the project's `Makefile` to have an `install` target, and failed when it didn't. To fix this, you defined a custom `installPhase`, containing instructions for copying the `icat` binary to the correct output location, in effect installing it.
```

> Up to that point, the `stdenv` automatically determined the `buildPhase` information for the `icat` package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Up to that point, the `stdenv.mkDerivation` automatically determined the `buildPhase` information for the `icat` package.
```
